## **Physics-informed Meta-instrument for eXperiments** **(PiMiX) with applications to fusion energy**

**Zhehui Wang** **[1]** **, Shanny Lin** **[1,2]** **, Miles Teng-Levy** **[1]** **,**
**P. Chu** **[1]** **, B. T. Wolfe** **[1]** **, C. S. Wong** **[1]** **, C. S. Campbell** **[1]** **,**
**Xin Yue** **[3]** **, Liyuan Zhang** **[4]** **, D. Aberle** **[1]** **, M. Alvarado Alvarez** **[1]** **,**
**D. Broughton** **[1]** **, Ray T. Chen** **[2]** **, Baolian Cheng** **[1]** **, F. Chu** **[1]** **,**
**Eric R. Fossum** **[3]** **, M. A. Foster** **[5]** **, C.-K. Huang** **[1]** **, V. Kilic** **[5]** **,**
**Karl Krushelnick** **[6]** **, W. Li** **[1]** **, Eric Loomis** **[1]** **, T. Schmidt Jr** **[1]** **, Sky**
**K. Sjue** **[1]** **, C. Tomkins** **[1]** **, D. A. Yarotski** **[1]** **& Renyuan Zhu** **[4]**


1 Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
2 The University of Texas, Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
3 Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA
4 California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
5 Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
6 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA


E-mail: `zwang@lanl.gov`


(Manuscript based on a recent presentation in the 29th IAEA Fusion Energy
Conference (FEC), London, UK, Oct. 16 - 21, 2023)


**Abstract.** Data-driven methods (DDMs), such as deep neural networks, offer a
generic approach to integrated data analysis (IDA), integrated diagnostic-to-control
(IDC) workflows through data fusion (DF), which includes multi-instrument data
fusion (MIDF), multi-experiment data fusion (MXDF), and simulation-experiment
data fusion (SXDF). These features make DDMs attractive to nuclear fusion energy and
power plant applications, leveraging accelerated workflows through machine learning
and artificial intelligence. Here we describe Physics-informed Meta-instrument for
eXperiments (PiMiX) that integrates X-ray (including high-energy photons such
as _γ_ -rays from nuclear fusion), neutron and others (such as proton radiography)
measurements for nuclear fusion. PiMiX solves multi-domain high-dimensional
optimization problems and integrates multi-modal measurements with multiphysics
modeling through neural networks. Super-resolution for neutron detection and energy
resolved X-ray detection have been demonstrated. Multi-modal measurements through

MIDF can extract more information than individual or uni-modal measurements alone.

Further optimization schemes through DF are possible towards empirical fusion scaling
laws discovery and new fusion reactor designs.


_CONTENTS_ 2


**Contents**


**1** **Introduction** **2**


**2** **PiMiX data-fusion framework** **4**

2.1 Statistical inference and optimization in PiMiX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.2 Neutron, X-ray and _γ_ -ray emission models and measurements . . . . . . 10


**3** **PiMiX hardware** **12**

3.1 Ultrafast CMOS image sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

3.2 Ultrafast Scintillators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

3.3 Imaging modalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14


**4** **Data and machine learning in PiMiX** **15**
4.1 Experimental data from different facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

4.2 Noise emulation & statistical inferences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

4.3 Neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19


**5** **Experimental validations** **20**
5.1 Super position resolution for neutron counting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.2 Energy-resolved X-ray measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3 Multi-instrument data fusion (MIDF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22


**6** **Summary & conclusions** **23**


**1. Introduction**


Recent controlled release of nuclear fusion energy by laboratory plasmas, such as in
the National Ignition Facility (NIF) [1] and in the Joint European Torus (JET) [2],
ushered in a new era of nuclear fusion. NIF used a form of inertial confinement fusion
(ICF) to generate fusion energy exceeding 3 MJ per shot, or a fusion-energy-over-laserenergy gain (Q) satisfying 1 _<_ Q _<_ 2. JET used a form of magnetic confinement fusion
(MCF) to achieve a fusion yield approaching 60 MJ per discharge, or a fusion-powerover-heating-power in steady state reaching 0.5 _<_ Q _<_ 1. NIF released most of the
fusion energy within 1 ns. JET maintained an 10 MW of fusion power, which doubled
the previous record, for about 5 seconds. Both NIF and JET plasmas were tritium rich,
consuming about 0.1 mg of tritium for 0.07 mg of deuterium in JET, taking advantage of
the large deuterium-tritium (DT) fusion cross section. In addition to multi-institutional
collaborations such as NIF, JET and ITER, which are supported by public funds, new
fusion concepts and prototypes supported by private investments are thriving [3]. There
is still plenty of room for innovative fusion energy concepts and improvements over
the existing concepts before fusion energy becomes a reliable renewable carbon-neutral
power source, with _Q >_ 10. Meanwhile, many low-cost thermonuclear fusion concepts


_CONTENTS_ 3


today reside in the parameter space corresponding to the fusion triple product ( _n_ _i_ _Tτ_ _E_ )
below 10 [16] keV·s/m [3], or _Q <_ 0 _._ 1. Improvement over existing or discovery of new
promising concepts with _n_ _i_ _Tτ_ _E_ above 10 [18] keV·s/m [3] will drastically improve reward/risk
ratios for further investment, as illustrated in FIG. 1.


**Figure 1.** Nuclear fusion reactor development process can be described by a pyramid
starting from many possible ideas to a small number of eventual reactor designs. From
the cost and time perspectives, fusion reactor maturation may be regarded as an
inverted pyramid shown on the right. PiMiX as a generic heterogeneous data fusion
(DF) platform, can be used both for conceptual maturation, as well as optimization of
experiments.


Here we describe a new artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML)enhanced measurement and DF framework, called Physics-informed Meta-instrument
for eXperiments (PiMiX) for data collection, data handling and automated data
interpretation, in the era of laboratory ignited plasmas. PiMiX, based on neural
networks and deep learning algorithms, integrates physics understanding with
heterogenous data streams from experiments, multiscale multi-physics simulations,
and metadata such as material properties for data interpretation. PiMiX also offers
predictive potential for experiments and fusion plasma concepts. Therefore, PiMiX can
be used, through the lower feedback loop as illustrated in FIG. 1, for experimental
design, optimization and reduction of the turn-around time and cost for new concepts
and iterations over a large design space (reactor ideas, for example).
PiMiX uses machine learning algorithms to integrate measurement hardware (Xray, neutron, proton imaging devices, _etc._ ), data processing, and data interpretation.
Applications of machine learning to plasmas are a relatively new yet rapidly growing
interdisciplinary field [4, 5]. PiMiX is built upon recent progress in imaging, machine
learning from images, and automated processing of images from a diverse setting of
plasma experiments [6, 7, 8, 9, 11]. Successful applications of deep learning for data
analysis such as particle tracking, classification, contour extraction and nonlinear threedimensional (3D) reconstruction and regression have been demonstrated.
Besides automated and integrated data processing from multiple diagnostics suites,


_CONTENTS_ 4


PiMiX intends to address whether, through multiple diagnostic data integration or
experimental DF, and other forms of DF such as simulation and experiment DF
(SXDF), more information can be extracted than by using individual diagnostics
alone. There are ample existing examples of experimental DF, which make use of
data complementarity from different measurements. By using X-ray and neutron
measurements simultaneously, material identification is possible. By using several
imaging cameras from different line of sights, 3D reconstructions of a plasma density
distribution have been obtained [12]. By using dual-energy X-ray sources, improvements
in imaging contrast and radiation dose have been demonstrated in X-ray computed
tomography. PiMiX also leverages the fact that a large number of diagnostics are now or
will be available from NIF, JET and ITER for experimental DF. There are more than 100
implosion target diagnostics in NIF [14], including 37 nuclear, 13 optical and 57 X-ray
diagnostics. The diagnostics measure everything between the edge of the implosion down
to nuclear interactions. Terabytes of data are generated per shot from NIF’s diagnostic
suite. In JET, diagnostic enhancement for DT experiments aimed at better spatial,

                                                         temporal, and energy resolution while increasing measurement coverage of neutrons, _γ_
rays, fast ions, instabilities signals [15]. In ITER, a large array of instruments, magnetic,
neutron, optical, bolometric, spectroscopic, microwave, infrared, wall and operational
diagnostics, will provide the data necessary to control, evaluate and optimize plasma
performance in ITER and to further the understanding of plasma physics in the _Q >_ 1

regime.
Below, we first describe PiMiX DF framework in Sec. 2, and explain the
complementarity of traditional physics-driven models (PDMs) and the new DDMs using
machine learning algorithms. In Sec. 3, we describe image sensors and scintillator
based measurement hardware, motivated by validation of thermonuclear plasma ignition
models. The emphasis is on X-ray photon and neutron counting capabilities towards
higher information yield from fusion experiments. In Sec. 4 on data and machine learning
in PiMiX, we highlight various experimental data sets, synthetic data sets, deep neural
network algorithms, together with a Bayesian inference approach to PiMiX. In Sec. 5,
we highlight the initial PiMiX results in super spatial resolution for neutron detection,
energy-resolved X-ray measurement through physics-informed machine learning, and
integration of two diagnostics (proton and X-ray imaging) for higher information yield.
Further PiMiX applications for fusion conceptual maturation, such as fusion yield
scaling, and experimental optimization, such as higher fusion yield, are possible.


**2. PiMiX data-fusion framework**


PiMiX consists of hardware, data and algorithmic components, which may be integrated
using DDMs such as machine learning, as shown in FIG. 2. The PiMIX framework
has three coupled loops towards DF: an experimental loop to collect data, a model
loop to generate synthetic data for experimental data interpretation. The data fusion
itself is usually an iterative process for experimental data and modeled or synthetic


_CONTENTS_ 5


data. Uncertainties and errors can come from all three loops. For the experimental
loop, detector noise such as dark current and probabilistic interactions of photons and
particles with objects and detectors give rise to signal fluctuations such as Poisson noise.
For the model loop, in additional to computational errors, most kinetic or fluid models
for a plasma can not make accurate predictions about the experimental data in ICF or
MCF due to model uncertainties. One example of fluid model uncertainty is from the
transport coefficients. For the data analysis, algorithmic uncertainties such as round-off
errors are not avoidable [16].


**Figure 2.** PiMiX framework integrates data collection (the left loop) with physics
and modeling of data (the right loop) through data fusion (the middle loop). The data
fusion loop can feed back to the experimental data collection through experimental
optimization and real-time controls, as shown in FIG. 1. The data fusion loop can also
feed back to the modeling and interpretation to fine tune models. A growing number
of analysis tools are now available for data fusion. Machine learning and artificial
intelligence provide new possibilities to automate PiMIX workflows and are therefore
transformative. PiMiX is an update of an earlier workflow [18].


Most ICF and MCF instruments generate raw data in 1D, such as neutron, charged
particle or X-ray spectroscopy, or in 2D, such as X-ray, _γ_ -ray, or neutron images.
These raw data, after postprocessing, can be used to reconstruct 3D structures or timedependent 3D structures of the plasmas, which contain rich physics such as implosion
asymmetry in ICF, or structures due to energetic particles, plasma flows, waves, and
turbulence in MCF. The 1D and 2D raw data generation can be described by the
following universal equation,


_Y_ = _M_ _X_ + _B,_ (1)


where _Y_ is the 1D or 2D raw data from the measurement, _B_ is the measurement
noise, such as the dark field in imaging. _X_ is the plasma property such as X-ray
or neutron emissivity. _M_ is the measurement matrix. In most cases encountered in
fusion experiments, _M_ is assumed to be a function of geometry and detector materials


_CONTENTS_ 6


properties, which do not depend on plasma properties _X_ and therefore Eq. (1) admits
linear superposition of solutions to plasma emissivity. The linear superposition property
also allows _X_ to be expressed in terms of a superposition of a complete set of basis
functions _ψ_ _n_,

_X_ = � _c_ _n_ _ψ_ _n_ _._ (2)


_n_


Besides Fourier and wavelet decomposition, other recent examples for 2D basis function
method for X-ray and neutron imaging applications are Laguerre-Gaussian modes
decomposion in 2D, and spherical harmonic decomposition in 3D [12].
Finding _X_ from _Y_ therefore reduces to the well-known linear inverse problem or
linear matrix inversion when _X_ and _Y_ are discretized (digitized as in 1D spectra or
2D images or 3D voxel arrays). Traditional algorithms such as Gaussian elimination
require that the number of equations matches the number of unknowns. The number of
unknowns in _X_ (a matrix after discretization) can be quite large, which correspondingly
requires a large number of measurements _Y_, a large known measurement matrix _M_ and
well characterized noise properties _B_ . The number of unknowns in _X_, _N_ ( _X_ ), may be
estimated to be ( _L/δ_ ) _[D]_, with _L_ being the size of the plasma, _δ_ the spatial resolution
and D = 2 (two dimensional), or 3 (three dimensional). To resolve a 1-mm of an ICF
implosion target, for example, a 2D model for _X_ would require _N_ ( _X_ ) = 10 [4], 10 [6] at
_δ_ = 10 and 1 micrometer resolution, respectively. _N_ ( _X_ ) in 3D model would become
10 [6] and 10 [9] at 10 and 1 micrometer resolution. When a back-lighter as an external
radiation source for ICF diagnostics rather than the plasma emissivity is used, Eq. (1)
can still be used. The plasma-induced backlighter attenuation and scattering are now
described by the unknown _M_ with _X_ for the source is assumed to be known.


**Figure 3.** A comparison of the traditional explicit-function-driven workflow (top)
with the data-driven neural network (‘implicit function’) workflow in PiMiX (bottom).


There are a number of difficulties in implementing the traditional approach in
practice. A large number of unknowns, depending on the desired plasma temporal and


_CONTENTS_ 7


spatial resolution, require a correspondingly large number of calculations, which may be
symbolically described by the inverse equation


_X_ = _M_ _[−]_ [1] ( _Y −_ _B_ ) + _X_ 0 _,_ (3)


where _M_ _[−]_ [1] stands for the inverse matrix to _M_ if the inverse matrix exist, or pseudoinverse if the inverse matrix is ill defined. Pseudo-inverse arises, for example, when the
number of the known equations is less than the number of unknowns, or when _M_ is not
a square matrix. One example of pseudo-inverse is Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse. _X_ 0
is an arbitrary vector in the NULL space of the measurement matrix, _i.e. M_ _X_ 0 = 0.
A traditional PDM approach requires known measurement matrix _M_ and noise
vector _B_ through calibration, which we may call ‘explicit’ calibration functions as in
Fig. 3. Detailed physics models and meticulous calibrations are usually required to
derived measurement matrix _M_ and dark field vector _B_ . Furthermore, X-ray and
neutron interactions with matter (including detector materials) are probabilistic and
contain different interaction branches such as photo-electric (or neutron) absorption,
coherent scattering and incoherent scattering. For high energy X-rays and _γ_ -rays, the
electron-positron pair production (or corresponding neutron-induced nuclear reactions)
is also possible. In other words, for the same radiation dose, the measurement matrix
_M_ can’t strictly be considered to be a constant, even though this is often assumed. As
was summarized in [17]. Many factors can contribute to variations in _M_ for a specific
measurement: spectral response, flux response, detection efficiency, temporal resolution,
spatial resolution, and dynamic range. Similar considerations may be applicable to the
dark field vector _B_ . In a fusion plasma environment, it can be difficult to know _B_
ahead of an experiment. In short, high-resolution measurement of plasmas based on Xrays and neutrons requires correspondingly large number of measurements, calibrations,
and background characterization. The probabilistic interactions of X-rays and neutrons
with matter imply that the solutions to Eq. (1) and (3) may not be unique for the same
measurement, only a probabilistic interpretation of X-ray, _γ_ -ray and neutron data, such
as maximum likelihood interpretation, is possible.
DDMs based on neural networks, especially deep neural networks (or neural
networks with more than two layers of nodes), are now growingly adopted in 1D
(spectroscopy) and 2D (imaging) data processing outside nuclear fusion and plasma
physics. Here we discuss their applications in burning fusion plasma experiments, in
particular, X-ray and neutron imaging through the PiMiX framework. Examples of deep
neural networks include fully connected neural networks, convolution neural networks,
autoencoders, encoder-decoder networks, generative adversarial networks, _etc_ . Despite
of the network architectural variations, workflows in using the neural networks for data
processing are similar as shown in the bottom frame of Fig. 3; _i.e._ each of the network
requires a set of data, _Y_ in Eq. (1) as inputs, and _X_ as outputs. Solving Eq. (1) now
turns into a.) identifying a neural network architecture; b.) selecting the activation
function; and c.) tuning the parameters of the neural network including the weights
of the neurons or nodes. One key difference between the DDMs, also called machine


_CONTENTS_ 8


learning (ML) and artificially intelligent (AI) methods, and the traditional PDMs is
that, the neural network architecture, instead of explicit functions _M_ and _B_, is used
in the data processing workflow. In other words, neural networks may be regarded as
‘implicit functions’, which depend on the network architecture, neuron weights, and

activation functions.

Although physics is not explicitly required in DDMs, which is sometimes perceived
as a ‘blackbox magic’ of machine learning, there is a growing number of ways that physics
may be incorporated, including but not limited to: 1.) Selecting physics motivated
variables and their pairing _{X_, _Y }_ ; 2.) Selecting datasets for inputs and define
outputs; 3.) Selecting neural network architecture, activation function and other hyperparameters; 4.) Using physics models to generate synthetic data sets, _{X_ _S_ _, Y_ _S_ _}_ as shown
in Fig. 3; 5.) Enforcing physics and constraints in neural network loss functions; and
6.) Assessing and validating the results generated by DDMs. Incorporating physics into
development of DDMs may be called ‘physics-informed’ or ‘physics-regulated’ machine
learning and AI. Adding physics may also decrease the amount of experimental data
needed for deep learning.
DDM approaches to PiMiX allow integration of multiple diagnostics or ‘metainstruments’ that merge hardware not physically collocated. Integrated measurement
capability is a new frontier in fusion instrumentation, enabled by the growing number of
instruments and data, and DDMs such as deep learning. As shown in Fig. 4, data from
two or more diagnostics may be fed into a neural network to generate physical quantities
of interest. Here we assume that model- and physics-motivated quantities, such as
plasma density ( _n_ _e_ ), ion temperature ( _T_ _i_ ), and energy confinement time ( _τ_ _E_ ), neutron
yield ( _Y_ _n_ ), are a function of the signals from Diag1 and Diag 2, _n_ _e_ = _f_ ( _Diag_ 1 _, Diag_ 2).
Explicit form of the function _f_ is not required. A neural network correlates the input
data with _n_ _e_, _T_ _i_, and _τ_ _E_ implicitly, based on physics considerations. Some additional
discussions are given in Sec. 2.2.
DDM approaches to PiMiX also allow data augmentation to compensate for
insufficient datasets. It has been recognized that in many fusion experiments including
ICF, there are insufficient amount of experimental data for training of deep neural
networks from scratch. Transfer learning can be used for data augmentation [19].
A transfer learning workflow has been described for ICF experiments [20]. The
additional benefits include simulation calibration, low fidelity simulations validation
against high fidelity simulations. In Fig. 4, we propose to use ‘low cost’ high
data-throughput experiments to augment data from ‘high-cost’ low data-throughput
experiments. While X-ray instruments have demonstrated nanometer resolution under
certain conditions through long signal integration time, repetitive measurements, and
the use of monochromatic light, this feat may be hard to reproduce in transient ICF
experiments, when the experiments last less than a fraction of one millisecond and are
very costly to reproduce. An X-ray and neutron imaging spatial resolution in the range
of 1-10 micrometers would be superior to the state-of-the-art in ICF [17]. The sub-ns
resolution is dictated by the need to produce movies of implosion dynamics that can


_CONTENTS_ 9


**Figure 4.** Data augmentation is an important part of PiMiX strategy when the
experimental data alone are not sufficient for neural network training. We may
use low-cost experimental emulation and surrogates rather than synthetic data from
simulations in PiMiX. Tuning and validations by new surrogate experiments can be
readily designed and deployed at, for example, a light source facility like the Argonne
Advanced Photon Source. Transfer learning is then used to deploy the PiMiX to
nuclear fusion experiments.


be directly compared with the state-of-the-art hydro codes that run on today’s best
high-performance computers.
Even though we emphasize the use of the ML and AI methods for PiMiX here,
we may combine ML and AI methods with traditional PDMs together for better
results. Such a combination may be necessary for physics-interpretable ML for fusion
applications. For example, it is straight forward to expand Eq. (1) to include two
measurement matrices, one each for Diag1 and Diag2 as shown in Fig. 4, such and
similar PDMs would complement and enhance DDMs, and _vice versa_, as discussed in

Sec. 2.1.


_2.1. Statistical inference and optimization in PiMiX_


Due to uncertainties in models (including ML models), computational errors, instrument
noise, random yet significant background in fusion plasma experiments, and probabilistic
interaction physics of X-rays and neutrons, probabilistic inferences need to be applied
to both traditional PDMs, such as Eq. (1), and data-driven models, such as deep neural
networks or deep learning.
The uncertainties, noise and errors turn the exact solutions of Eq. (1) into an
statistical inference of optimized estimate for _X_,


_L_ ( _X_ ) _≡∥Y −_ _M_ _X ∥_ _p_ _< ϵ._ (4)


Here we introduce the loss or cost function _L_ ( _X_ ) as the difference between _Y_ and


_CONTENTS_ 10


_M_ _X_ . _ϵ_ is the sum of all noise and errors, which may give the upper bound to _L_ . The
loss function is calculated by using the so-called _l_ _[p]_ norm [21]. If _p_ = 2, the difference
is calculated by using the _l_ [2] norm or the Euclidean distance. In some cases, _p_ = 0 may
be desired, which is, however, computationally hard and related to an open Millennium
Prize problem (P _vs._ NP). Additional details and references were given in Ref. [18]. In
practice, _p_ = 1 is often used.
Coexistence of DDMs, PDMs and others (such as surrogate experiments) for _X_
offers another approach to statistical optimization (‘minimizing _ϵ_ ’) in PiMiX, which may
be expressed in terms of the following equation in general [18],


˜ ˜
( _X,_ _X_ ) _≡_ argmin _f_ ( _X_ )=0; ˜ _f_ ( ˜ _X_ )=0 _[L]_ [(] _[X][,]_ _X_ ) _,_ (5)

_L_ ( _X,_ _X_ ˜ ) _≡∥I_ _exp_ ( _X_ ) _−_ _I_ [˜] _syn_ ( _X_ [˜] ) _∥_ _p_ + _R_ ( _X,_ _X_ ˜ ) _._ (6)


Here we generalize the cost function _L_ to be the difference between a function of
corresponding synthetic data the experimental data such as images _I_ [˜] _syn_ ( _X_ [˜] ). _I_ _exp_ _X_ ˜( is the corresponding theoretical vector of _X_ ) (each is a 2D intensity map) and the
_X_ . The regularization functions _f_ ( _X_ ) = 0, and _f_ [˜] ( _X_ [˜] ) =0 could include energy
conservation, rotational symmetry of the images, and others. Additional regularization
to _L_ through _R_, such as the positiveness of the spectroscopy and imaging signals [22],

is often used as well.

Bayesian deep learning, Gaussian process and others have emerged as probabilistic
deep learning frameworks to integrate deep learning with probabilistic models [23].
Applications of probabilistic deep learning include statistical optimization of the
inference results such as feature identification [24], uncertainty quantification, model
and hypothesis testing [25]. Bayes by Backprop is an efficient and backpropagationcompatible algorithm for learning a probability distribution on the weights of a neural
network [26]. Adoption of these existing probabilistic deep learning algorithms for
PiMiX, including fully connected neural networks, convolutional neural networks,
autoencoders, and generative adversarial networks, is on-going.


_2.2. Neutron, X-ray and γ-ray emission models and measurements_


Next, we discuss, as an example, the applications of PiMiX to assessment of ignition
condition in thermonuclear fusion. The ignition condition for ICF and MCF is usually
determined by energy and power balance, or the Lawson criterion [27]. In MCF, the
Lawson criterion can be expressed in terms of the fusion triple product, _nTτ_ _E_, as a
function of temperature, see Fig. 5a, based on a recent tutorial paper [28].
Fundamental factors that affect ignition in ICF have been analyzed in details
recently [29]. Additional models in light of the recent NIF ignition can be found
in [30, 31, 32, 13]. The condition for sustained thermonuclear burn of the hot spot

in NIF is


_τ_ _rep_ _≤_ _τ_ _H_ _,_ (7)


_CONTENTS_ 11


**Figure 5.** Ignition boundary models in magnetic confinement fusion (a) and inertial
confinement fusion (b), and comparisons with experiments in JET and NIF. For
magnetic confinement, kinetic effects are ignored. For NIF, the residue kinetic energy
(i.e., random motion on the hot spot during burn) is ignored. The imploding kinetic
energy directly provides the heating energy of the DT fuel. The minimum required
peak-no-burn temperature of hot DT (the T in Eq. (8)) or hot DT pressure strongly
depends on the peak implosion velocity (see Eq. (8) in Ref. [29]). The detailed
derivation is given in [31].


where _τ_ _rep_ = _E_ _T_ _/P_ _h_ is the nuclear fusion reproduction time, and _τ_ _H_ = _R_ _hs_ _/C_ _s_ _[∗]_ [is]
the hydrodynamic disassembly time. Plugging in the models for _τ_ _rep_ and _τ_ _H_ and
assuming thermonuclear equilibrium for electrons and ions at different temperatures,
one obtains [29]



_ρR ≥_ _[f]_ _[DT]_ _[A]_ _[DT]_

_N_ _A_



(3 _kT_ _i_ _/_ 2 + 3 _kT_ _e_ _/_ 2 + _E_ _rad_ _/n_ _DT_ ) _C_ _s_ _[∗]_
_,_ (8)
_⟨σv⟩W_ _f_ _−_ ( _Q_ [˙] _[b]_ + _Q_ [˙] _[e]_ ) _f_ _DT_ _/n_ [2] _DT_



where _n_ _DT_ = _n_ _D_ + _n_ _T_, _f_ _DT_ = [(] _[n]_ _[D]_ [ +] _[ n]_ _[T]_ [)] [2] . Additional detailed definitions of the

_n_ _D_ _n_ _T_

parameters in Eq. (8) are given in Refs. [31, 32, 29]. The different model predictions
are shown in Fig. 5b. While some models can be readily eliminated based on the
recent NIF ignition experiments, such as the shot N210808, other models may require
most sophisticated measurements for higher resolutions and advanced data-processing

framework such as PiMiX.

The suggested observables include [29]: (1) a nuclear energy reproduction time
shorter than (or at least close to) the hydrodynamic disassembly time; (2) a sharp and
narrow peak neutron flux so that the full burn width of the capsule is close to the fullwidth half maximum (FWHM) as demonstrated in Figure 3 in Ref. [29] (right); (3) the
FWHM would be less than 50 - 60 ps for the current NIF capsule designs; and (4) a
burn fraction close to 1.65%. A burn fraction of 3.3% in a capsule with 180 microgram
fuel would produce 7.1 _×_ 10 [17] neutrons.
We summarize measurement capabilities and gaps to meet the physics model
validation and fusion yield optimization requirements in Table 1. Quantitative neutron


_CONTENTS_ 12


and high-energy photons (nuclear fusion _γ_ -rays) measurements are especially important
to further optimization of experiments such as NIF.


**Table 1.** Multi-modal measurement (1D and 2D) options for PiMiX, and a comparison
of detectors, spatial resolution ( _δ_ ), data types, model for data processing, and 3D
reconstruction algorithmic options.


**Modality** Uni-modal Multi-modal
X-rays neutrons _γ_ -rays charged (PiMiX)
particles

[p/D, e _[−]_ /e [+] ]
_X_ _ρ_ R, _T_ _e_ _T_ _i_, Y _n_ _ρ_ R _ρ_ R multi-physics
flow, B field _Y_ _n_ B field
_Y_ _I_ _S_, _E_ _X_ _I_ _S_, nToF _I_ _S_ _I_ _S_, _E_ _C_ (multiple)


Detector _←−· · ·_ scintillator + imaging sensor _· · · −→_
Cherenkov (ultrafast Si)
_δ_ _>_ 10 µm (1-10 µm)
Data homogeneous heter.
Model explicit implicit
3D Radon Multi-view Abel Sparse


**3. PiMiX hardware**


Extending upon the summary Table 1, we first discuss detector hardware with
an emphasis on ultrafast complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) image
sensors, scintillator convertors, and imaging modalities with an emphasis on X-ray
photon and neutron counting methods [18, 33].


_3.1. Ultrafast CMOS image sensors_


Recent advances in imaging sensors offer a growing number of choices for implementation
in PiMiX, see Table 2 for some examples. Many of the existing imager options are
available through advances outside nuclear fusion. CMOS image sensors are rapidly
replacing charge-coupled devices (CCDs) sensors as the primary digital image sensor
technology for fusion energy and other applications [34]. The state-of-the-art commercial

fast CMOS cameras such as Phantom TMX 7510 have a full resolution of 1280 _×_ 800

pixels at 76k frames per second (fps). In comparison, one of the highest frame rate burstmode image sensors, reported by Tohoku University, Japan, has reached 100 Million fps
with 368 frames record length. The key to this burst-mode high-speed performance was
the high-density memory process, which formed deep-trench high-density capacitors


_CONTENTS_ 13


inside each pixel to store the frames. For scientific instrumentation and niche market,
such a unique fabrication process would be either not accessible or too expensive to
implement. Fossum group in Dartmouth, in collaboration with LANL, is currently
developing a high-speed continuous-wave (CW) sampling mode image sensor based on a
low-cost 180-nm process (TMX 7510 used 110-nm process) [9, 10]. With a superblockswise low-noise readout structure, a novel asynchronous SAR ADC design, and pumpgate global-shuttle pixel, the new Dartmouth sensor can run at 78.1 kfps but with much
lower total noise than TMX 7510. The sensor will have 12 identical superblocks. Each
superblock will be self-contained each with its own pixel array, readout circuits, and
peripheral supporting circuits. Multiple superblocks can be instantiated on the same
chip to configure the sensor resolution easily without sacrificing the frame rate. A
96 _×_ 120 test chip has been designed and taped out [10]. Some of the open questions for
high-speed CMOS applications in fusion include transient electromagnetic pulse (EMP)
responses, radiation and neutron hardness.


**Table 2.** High-speed silicon (Si) CMOS image sensor options for PiMiX, additional
details including references in [18]. CW stands for continuous-wave sampling mode.


Technology Sensor framerate No. of frames Pixel Dynamic
thickness (µm) (MHz) (burst mode) pitch (µm) range
UXI _<_ 100 500 4 25 _∼_ 10 [3]

pRad2 _<_ 100 4 10 40 _<_ 10 [3]

AGIPD 500 4.5+ 352 200 10 [4]


KeckPAD 500 6.5 8 150 _>_ 10 [3]


ePix100 500 120 Hz CW 25 _>_ 10 [3]


EIGER 450 9 KHz CW 75 _>_ 10 [3]


Ultra UBSi _<_ 100 10 [3] 25 7.4 _<_ 10 [3]


Teledyne (Dalsa) _<_ 100 100 16 _<_ 50
Dartmouth _<_ 100 20 24 25 _>_ 10 [3]


_3.2. Ultrafast Scintillators_


Scintillators are widely used in nuclear fusion and plasma experiments for X-ray,
neutron detection, and radiographic imaging using penetrating ionizing radiations
such as relativistic protons and electrons. However, most instruments are limited
by scintillators that were developed decades ago, which can’t meet the increasingly
demanding experimental requirements such as in ignited plasma environment. Two new
classes of scintillators are emerging that could significantly outperform the traditional
materials. One is ultrafast inorganic scintillators, which are also pursued in parallel
by the high-energy physics (HEP) community for experiments such as the Large


_CONTENTS_ 14


Hadron Collider (LHC) and high-luminosity LHC (HL-LHC). Table 3 lists optical and
scintillation properties of several promising inorganic scintillators, characterized at the
Caltech HEP Crystal Lab [36, 37]. Another class of scintillators is organic-inorganic lead
halide perovskites with ABX3 structure. The new pervoskites have attracted attention
in recent years for ionizing radiation detection due to their short attenuation lengths,
high stopping powers, large mobility-lifetime products, tunable bandgaps, simple and
low-cost single crystal growth from liquid solution processes. Furthermore, advances in

nanofabrications have resulted in novel surface structures that overcome the refractive

index mismatch and can direct light to image sensors for higher detection sensitivity
than conventional scintillators without using such meta-structures.


**Table 3.** Fast and ultrafast inorganic scintillators and their properties characterized at
Caltech HEP Crystal Laboratory [36, 37]. Organic scintillators, which may be better
for neutrons may be found in Ref. [35]. Light yield is within the 1st ns.


Scintillator BaF 2 BaF 2 :Y ZnO:Ga LYSO:Ce GAGG:Ce
density (g/cm [3] ) 4.89 4.89 5.67 7.4 6.5
Melting point ( _[o]_ C) 1280 1280 1975 2050 1850
X 0 (cm) 2.03 2.03 2.51 1.14 1.63
R _M_ (cm) 3.1 3.1 2.28 2.07 2.2

Z 51.6 51.6 27.7 64.8 51.8
_eff._
dE/dX (MeV/cm) 6.52 6.52 8.42 9.55 8.96
_λ_ peak (nm) 220 220 380 420 540
Refr. Index 1.5 1.5 2.1 1.82 1.92

Light yield (ph/MeV) 1200 1200 610 740 640
Decay time (ns) 0.6 0.6 _<_ 1 40 53


_3.3. Imaging modalities_


Based on the above discussions, time-resolved quantitative measurements of X-ray,
neutron and fusion _γ_ -ray signals are highly desirable in characterizing the implosion
process and further experimental optimization for higher neutron yield and complete
burn of the DT fuel. While most of the existing measurements are based on neutron and
X-ray flux integration, which tends to smear out energy, position and other important
information from individual energetic photons and neutrons. We recently described a
neutron time-projection chamber (TPC) design, which can significantly mitigate the
information loss in the measurement of neutrons [38]. Fig. 6 summarizes the conceptual
design and the existing building blocks for neutron TPC such as the CMOS detectors,
absorption and scattering elements for fusion neutrons, and the existing simulation
framework based on Allpix Squared [9]. Work is also ongoing to extend the use of the
TPC to measure nuclear fusion _γ_ -rays.


_CONTENTS_ 15


**Figure 6.** A neutron TPC design for nuclear fusion applications. The incoming
neutron momentum vector **P** 0 can be made accurately, which allows for accurate
neutron energy measurement through position-sensitive neutron or recoil particle
detection as well as time-of-flight (ToF).


**4. Data and machine learning in PiMiX**


In this section, we summarize the progress in data sets collection, synthetic data
generation aiming at better understanding/emulating experimental noise, improving
the signal-to-noise ratio to assist feature identification and image labelling, and machine
learning algorithms development for PiMiX.


_4.1. Experimental data from different facilities_


NIF provides X-ray, neutron and fusion _γ_ -ray experimental data that are generated at
high cost and a low repetition rate. Such data are not reproducible else where, which
limit in part the available experimental data for machine learning models. An existing
X-ray movie from NIF is shown in Fig. 7.
The total number of experimental NIF X-ray images exceeds 100 but is less than

_∼_
1000. Through segmentation, transformations (rotation, for example) and other data
augmentation techniques, it is possible to expand the experimental image set by a factor
of _∼_ 10. Some issues with the dataset are the low signal-to-noise ratio and low resolution
for definitive feature recognition. The second issue with NIF X-ray images is that most
of the images are not labelled, which limit their use for supervised machine learning.
Two example sets of neutron data are shown in Fig. 8 for shot N210207 (not ignited)
and N210808 (ignited). The top row is for a pair of neutron penumbra images (nonignition _vs_ ignition), the bottom row is for the corresponding neutron images through a
pinhole. The number of labelled neutron images is also very limited for ML purpose.
For experimental transfer learning, see for example Fig. 4, and for multi-experiment
DF (MXDF), PiMiX can leverage existing X-ray, neutron, and charged particle
accelerator facilities for experimental data augmentation and algorithm development.
User facilities such as OMEGA, OMEGA-EP at Rochester, and University of Michigan


_CONTENTS_ 16


**Figure 7.** An example of gated X-ray detector (GXD) implosion movie from NIF
(Shot N180918). The black & white (b&w) inserts are X-ray intensity images. The six
colored panels are Fourier transforms of the corresponding b&w intensity images.


**Figure 8.** A comparison two sets of neutron images from NIF. The viewing location
is at the equator 090-213. The b & w inserts are neutron intensity images. The colored
panels are Fourier transforms of the corresponding b&w neutron intensity images.


_CONTENTS_ 17


can generate X-ray, high-energy X-rays ( _γ_ -rays), charged particles, and neutron data by
using high-power short pulsed lasers. The advanced photon source (APS) at Argonne
and its upgrade provides/will provide synchrotron X-ray image data at 6.5 MHz (13
MHz for the upgrade). New detector capabilities through fast scintillators, metamaterial
structures, and CMOS imaging sensors will be used to collect better experimental data
for labelling and feature recognition. Existing NIF and new experimental data will be
combined for transfer learning algorithm development and validation. In addition to
facilitating reconstruction of 3D dynamic plasma movies, our goal is to achieve highresolution density measurement in the range of one to ten micrometers, with sub-ns
temporal resolution to produce the movies of implosion dynamics in NIF.


_4.2. Noise emulation & statistical inferences_


Improving signal-to-noise ratio for X-rays and neutron measurements, as shown in Fig. 7
and Fig. 8, is important to NIF and other fusion plasmas. Besides hardware methods,
here we examine DDMs that are under development for PiMiX. In our earlier work [39],
synthetic image generation did not sufficiently emulate the experimental noise. The noise
was shown to significantly affect the downstream image-processing workflows such as
3D reconstructions from sparse X-ray data. NIF targets previously were approximated
as constant density layers with perturbed interfaces. These perturbed interfaces were
parameterized as Legendre polynomials in a half plane and the surfaces are produced by
revolution. Coefficients of the polynomials were sampled from a distribution produced
from measured values and individual samples were rejected based upon self-intersection

of an interface and intersection between interfaces. Three dimensional volumes of the

target were produced at a resolution of 512 [3] voxels. NIST X-ray attenuation tables were
used to produce a volumetric representation of the linear attenuation of the material at
each voxel. To produce a synthetic radiograph, the python library TIGRE was used to
ray-trace the voxel model given a source-object-detector geometry.
Generative ML and AI algorithms such as generative adversarial networks (GANs)
are powerful tools for generating synthetic images that emulate experimental datasets,
including noise, through unsupervised machine learning. Some examples of synthetic
images that emulate the experimental X-ray images in NIF using Contrastive Unpaired
Translation (CUT) [40], an image-to-image translation tool, are shown in FIG. 9. The
key features and noise patterns of the synthetic images are qualitatively similar to the
experimental image.
Experimental data are intrinsically imbedded with physics and materials
information of particle interaction with a target. However, emulating experimental
datasets using GANs are usually not transparent in terms of physics and imbedded
materials information for synthetic images. To couple physics and material information
more directly to neural networks, we also use existing multi-physics codes such as
GEANT4, MCNP, and Bayesian inference engine (BIE) to generate synthetic data to
augment experimental datasets. The Allpix Squared simulation framework [42], an


_CONTENTS_ 18


**Figure 9.** Examples of X-ray synthetic data generated using a generative adversarial
network in comparison with the NIF experimental in the upper left corner.


open-source simulation tool that implements end-to-end simulations of particle detection
from incident radiation to digitized detector output, was demonstrated to generate these
datasets in neutron counting regime [9].
LANL developed a Bayesian Inference Engine (BIE) toolbox for synthetic
radiographic image generation and experimental image analysis [41]. Bayesian analysis
of fusion plasma diagnostics has been reported before [43]. Machine learning has been
recognized to potentially accelerate Bayesian methods for integrated diagnostic analysis
(IDA) and applications such as real-time controls. BIE uses the object-oriented language
Smalltalk for Bayesian inference, serving as a flexible tool for estimating unknown
parameters in mathematical models by integrating prior information with observed
data. In the context of radiographic measurement systems and geometric models for
experimental objects, BIE enables the investigation of confidence intervals regarding the
estimated object geometry and the comparison of likelihoods among different competing
hypotheses.
BIE consists of three components: a graphical programmer for the creation
and manipulation of the measurement system model, a geometric modeler for the
definition and interaction with the measurement system model, and an interactive
optimizer. The engine not only derives meaningful estimates of model parameters but
also offers a high degree of user engagement. By providing intuitive visualizations of the
inference process and model behaviors, the BIE empowers users to grasp the intricate


_CONTENTS_ 19


relationships between inputs, outputs, and parameter uncertainties. BIE is well-suited
for scenarios involving nonlinear relationships between model parameters and image
data, as illustrated in Figure 10 for a pair of X-ray and proton images of an Image Quality
Indicator (IQI) object [44]. The IQI used here comprises a gold sphere with a radius ( _r_ 2 )
of 5 mm, enclosed by a spherical shell made of Ti-6Al-4V alloy, extending to an outer
radius ( _r_ 1 ) of 7.9 mm. To counteract energy loss across the field of view and minimize
chromatic aberrations in the proton measurement, we integrated a dechromator which
is made of polycarbonate cubic slab with sides of length 11.7 cm, that features a tapered
cylindrical hole at the center.










|pRad,800MeV|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>|
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>||||
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>||0<br>100<br>1|50<br>200|

|x-ray,20MeV|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>250<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>250<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>250<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>250<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>250<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>250<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>250<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>||||||
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>250<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>||0<br>1|00<br>1|50<br>200<br>2|0|


**Figure 10.** The synthetic images using BIE depict the IQI using 800 MeV protons
(left), and 20 MeV X-rays (right).


_4.3. Neural networks_


In PiMiX, different neural network and deep learning algorithms perform versatile
tasks for DF workflows, complementing existing integrated data analysis (IDA)
workflows using explicit models such as measurement matrices _M_ . Prior to the recent
demonstration of fusion energy gain _Q >_ 1 [30], IDA has been used to validate physics
models, to assess the efficiency of heating or implosion, to mitigate instabilities, other
energy and particle loss mechanisms, and to interpret complex data in fusion plasmas.
In the ignited plasma era, transitions are ongoing from physics understanding, plasma
characterization, model validation to fusion energy production and optimization ( _Q >_ 10
or more), from prototype materials to fusion power plant engineering, and from the firstwall physics to machine and environment safety. Adoption of both traditional PDMs
and DDMs as in PiMiX to the new tasks such as integrated diagnostic-to-control (IDC)
is now timely and necessary. The growingly complexity, inter-disciplinary and multiphysics nature, and the harsh environment of fusion power plant operation also motivate
PiMiX or traditional IDA for accelerated workflows, reduced measurement hardware
through IDC, and real-time data handling capabilities for IDC.
We recently demonstrated deep neural networks for different plasma image


_CONTENTS_ 20


processing tasks, as an essential ingredient of DDMs for PiMiX. A Kohonen neural
network and a U-Net were used for tracking a large number of microparticles immersed
in an ambient plasma [6]. A deep convolutional neural network (CNN) was used for
supervised classification of plasma images associated with kink instabilities [7]. 3D
reconstruction of ICF implosion image was possible by using a CNN employing an
encoder-decoder architecture and sparse data [39]. The 3D reconstructed features were

found to be sensitive to noise. The 3D reconstruction has since been extended to

generative adversarial networks as a part of model-dependent reconstruction study [8].
Further development of DDMs for PiMiX will emphasize the coupling of PDMs with
DDMs, uncertainty quantifications [18], de-noising, and better DDM interpretability.


**5. Experimental validations**


We have demonstrated several ways to extract more information from images by using
DDMs and physics-informed DDMs. Here we highlight X-ray and neutron counting
measurements using physics-informed ML called a fully connected neural network,
followed by initial results in using BIE for multiple instrument (proton and X-ray) data
fusion. As mentioned above, neutron and X-ray counting measurements yield more
information than intensity-integrated measurements: including energy and position
information of individual neutrons and X-rays.


_5.1. Super position resolution for neutron counting_


Position-sensitive detection of neutrons has been used to extract more information such

as fast neutron energy and momentum from neutron data [38]. For demonstration of
sub-pixel or ‘super position’ resolution, neutron counting measurements were carried out
using customized CMOS image sensors with a neutron conversion layer of [10] B [9, 45].
The secondary particles _α_, [7] Li, and _γ_ -rays, generated from the neutron absorption by
10 B, reach the charge-depleted silicon layer within the detector to generate electron-hole
(e-h) pairs as signals. The generated charge signals will travel the charged depleted
silicon layer to the charge collection capacitors. The collected electric charge signals are
then digitized to form images of neutron hits, see examples given previously in Ref. [9].
A five-layer fully connected neural network (FCNN) for neutron image processing
is shown in Fig. 11. This simple workflow was sufficient since the signal-to-noise ratios
of the neutron-absorption signals were high and pre-processing of the images was not
needed. Each neutron images had a cropped input size of 14 _×_ 14 pixels. Dropout layers,
not shown explicitly in Fig. 11, are also included in the FCNN during the network
training and validation. Dropout layers helped to mitigate over-fitting issues as well
as uncertainty quantification. The Allpix Squared code generated a synthetic dataset
of 60k neutron events and their corresponding ground-truth labels for the neutron
position. The physics regularization included the total energies of the secondary particles
generated by neutron absorption. The blue kernel density estimation (KDE) plot in


_CONTENTS_ 21


**Figure 11.** A demonstration of super position resolution by using a physics-informed
5-layer fully connected neural network (FCNN) for neutron image processing. The
FCNN were trained using physics-informed synthetic data generated from Allpix
Squared [9].


Fig. 11 confirms sub-pixel position resolution for neutron detection with the associated

uncertainties.


_5.2. Energy-resolved X-ray measurements_


We extend the Allpix Squared data synthesis and analysis to X-rays in the photoncounting regime, Fig. 12. The experimental data were obtained using a variable energy
X-ray source (8-60 keV), as described in [46]. Various CMOS image sensors were tested
for different X-ray detection efficiency and signal-to-noise optimization.


**Figure 12.** X-ray energy calibration for synthetic data validated against experiments
using an variable energy X-ray source. One the left, 9 synthetic X-ray images generated
by Allpix Squared were compared with 9 examples of experimental images below. On
the right, the energy information has been extracted from both the synthetic and
experimental images, and were found to be consistent with each other.


Even though the signal-to-noise ratio for X-rays were significantly lower than for
neutron-induced signals as described in Sec. 5.1, we still confirmed that X-ray energies
can be resolved using the CMOS image sensors operated at room temperature. These
initial results validate the use of Allpix Squared synthetic data for ML algorithm


_CONTENTS_ 22


development and applications. The same detectors and data processing algorithms
will be used for X-ray photon counting and time-integrated measurement with variable
X-ray fluxes in plasmas and other related experimental settings.


_5.3. Multi-instrument data fusion (MIDF)_


To validate MIDF workflow and assess the quality of the synthetic images described
in Sec. 4.2, we applied the existing proton (800 MeV) and high-energy X-ray (20 MeV
end-point energy) radiography imaging at LANL to collect experimental images from
the IQI object. The experimental proton and X-ray image data, together with their
comparisons with the synthetic images in Fig. 10 are shown in Fig. 13.










|pRad,800MeV<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>0 50 100 150 200|Col2|Col3|pRad,800MeV|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>pRad,800MeV||||||
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>pRad,800MeV||0<br>1|0<br>1|00<br>1|50<br>200|

|pRad,800MeV<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>0 50 100 150 200|Col2|Col3|pRad,800MeV|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>pRad,800MeV||||||
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>pRad,800MeV||0<br>1|0<br>1|00<br>1|50<br>200|







|0 x-ray,20MeV|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>25<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>25<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>25<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>25<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>25<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>25<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>1|0<br>|50<br>200<br>2||

|0 x-ray,20MeV|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>25<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>25<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>25<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>25<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>25<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|
|0<br>50<br>100<br>150<br>200<br>25<br>0<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>00<br>50<br>|0<br>1|0<br>|50<br>200<br>2||


**Figure 13.** The experiment images of the IQI using 800 MeV protons (top left),
and 20 MeV X-rays (bottom left), and the corresponding chi-square differences,
right column, between the experimental and synthesized images in Fig. 10. The
result indicates the feasibility of multi-instrument data fusion for better results than

individual measurements alone.


Table 4 summarizes the fitted radii and corresponding errors, calculated using the
following equation,



( _[r]_ _r_ [1] 2

_[r]_ [1] ) =

_r_ 2




_[ −]_ [(] _[r]_ _r_ [1] 2 [)] [model]

( _[r]_ [1] [)] [model]



_r_ 2


_._
(9)

_[r]_ _r_ [1] 2 [)] [model]



_δ_ ( _[r]_ [1]




_[r]_ _r_ [1] 2 [)] [fitting] _[ −]_ [(] _r_ _[r]_ [1] 2



This metric measures and compares the accuracy of the radii fitting.
This initial study using static IQI objects demonstrates that employing a
combination of X-ray measurement at 20 MeV and proton measurement significantly


_CONTENTS_ 23


**Table 4.** The table summarizes the fitting results for each scenario, encompassing
individual species, dual species, and triple species. _r_ 1 denotes the outer radius of the
IQI, while _r_ 2 represents the inner radius of the IQI core. _r_ 1 _/r_ 2 is the ratio between the
outer radius and the inner radius, serving as a metric for assessing fitting uncertainties.
_δ_ ( _r_ 1 _/r_ 2) indicates the uncertainty between the fitting result and the designed model.

|Col1|Model X-ray 20 MeV proton 800 MeV X-ray<br>+ proton|
|---|---|
|_r_1<br>_r_2<br>_r_1_/r_2<br>_δ_(_r_1_/r_2)|0.79<br>0.8285<br>0.8117<br>0.8120<br>0.5<br>0.5003<br>0.4969<br>0.5006<br>1.58<br>1.6559<br>1.6336<br>1.6219<br>0.0481<br>0.0339<br>0.0265|



reduces the uncertainty (2 _._ 65%) compared to separate measurements alone (3 _._ 39% for
protons and 4 _._ 81% for X-rays at 20 MeV). The MIDF approach notably enhances
measurement sensitivity, although its efficacy is contingent upon factors like beam
profile, target density, and detector performance, which need to be considered together
through the PiMiX framework. Extension of the static targets to transient targets in
ICF implosion and others warrants further work.


**6. Summary & conclusions**


Here we describe a new artificial intelligence (AI) and machine Learning (ML)enhanced measurement and data fusion (DF) framework, called Physics-informed Metainstrument for eXperiments (PiMiX) for data collection, data handling and automated
data interpretation, in the era of laboratory ignited plasmas. PiMiX, based on
neural networks and deep learning algorithms, integrates physics understanding with
heterogenous data streams from experiments, multiscale multi-physics simulations, and
metadata such as material properties for data interpretation. PiMiX also offers the
predictive potential for experiments and fusion plasma concepts.
Data-driven methods (DDMs), especially machine learning and deep neural
networks, complement traditional explicit function, such as measurement matrices
_M_, approaches for data processing and interpretation. Some known issues with
measurement matrices _M_ include nonlinearity, degeneracy and singularity, which might
be addressed by constructing reduced-order models (ROMs) of the measurement or the
underlying experiment. Explicit models complement DDMs through various physicsdriven mechanisms such as synthetic data generation and cross-model validation.
DDMs allow DF from multiple diagnostics and construct ‘meta-instruments’ in
PiMiX. Besides automated and integrated data processing from multiple diagnostics
suite, PiMiX intends to address whether, through multiple instrument DF (MIDF),
and/or multiple experiment DF (MXDF), such as a combination of low-cost and highcost (such as NIF or ITER) experimental data, and other forms of DF such as simulation
and experiment DF (SXDF), more information can be extracted than using individual


_CONTENTS_ 24


diagnostics or a single experimental device/facility alone. Initial results from PiMiX
in super-resolution, energy-resolution and multi-instrument integration pave the way
towards new fusion reactor concept designs and optimization of fusion experiments.
_Acknowledgements_ We wish to thank Ann Satsangi and Joe Smidt (LANL ICF
program managers) for support of the work. This work is also made possible in part by
US Department of Energy (DoE) under the Contract No. 89233218CNA000001.


[1] LLNL’s National Ignition Facility delivers record laser energy, `[https://www.llnl.gov/article/](https://www.llnl.gov/article/50616/llnls-national-ignition-facility-delivers-record-laser-energy)`
```
   50616/llnls-national-ignition-facility-delivers-record-laser-energy
```

[2] Joint European Torus wikipedia page, `[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joint_European_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joint_European_Torus)`

```
   Torus

```

[3] International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 2022 _World Survey of Fusion Devices_

[4] Wang Z. _et al_ 2020 _IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science_ **48** 1-2

[5] Anirudh R. _et al_ 2023 _IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science_ **51** 1750 - 1838

[6] Wang Z. _et al_ 2020 _Phys. Plasmas._ **27** (3), 033703

[7] Falato M.J. _et al_ 2022 _J. Plasma Phys._ **88** (6), 895880603

[8] Wolfe B.T. _et al_ 2023 _Rev. Sci. Instrum._ **94** (2), 023504

[9] Yue X. Lin S. _et al_ 2023 _Proc. Sci._ **420** 041

[10] Yue X. and Fossum E.R. 2023 _Sensor_ **23** (14) 6356; `[https://doi.org/10.3390/s23146356](https://doi.org/10.3390/s23146356)`

[11] Falato M.J. _et al_ 2022 _arXiv_ 2211.04597

[12] Volegov P.L. _et al_ 2017 _J. Appl. Phys._ **122** 175901

[13] Baker K.L. _et al Phys. Plasmas_ **29** 062705

[14] Kilkenny J.D. _et al_ 2023 _Rev. Sci. Instrum._ **94** 081101

[15] Figueiredo J. _et al_ 2016 _Rev. Sci. Instrum._ **87** 11D443

[16] von Neumann J. 1951 _J. Res. Nat. Bur. Stand. Appl. Math. Series_ 3 36-38

[17] Wang Z. _et al_ 2022 _Los Alamos Report number_ LA-UR-22-20674, presented at _IFE Science &_
_Technology Community Strategic Planning Workshop_, May 19, 2022 (Virtual)

[18] Wang Z. _et al_ 2023 _Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A_ **1057** 168690

[19] Pan S.J. and Yang Q. 2010 _IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng._ **22** (10) 1345 -1359

[20] Humbird K. _et al_ 2020 _IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci._ **48** (1) 61-70

[21] Boyd S. and Vanderberghe L. 2009 _Convex Optimization_, 7th ed. (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK)

[22] Wang Z. _et al_ 2000 _Physical Review E_ **61** (2) 1904-1911

[23] Wang H. and Yeung D.-Y. 2020 _ACM Comput. Surv._ **53** (5) Article 108

[24] Chen F.-C. and Jahanshahi M. R. 2018 _IEEE Trans. Industr. Electr._ **65** (5) 4392 - 4400

[25] Sugiyama M. 2016 _Introduction to Statistical Machine Learning_ (Elsevier)

[26] Blundell C. _et al_ 2015 _arXiv_ :1505.05424

[27] Lawson J.D. 1957 _Proc. Phys. Soc. B_ **70** 6

[28] Wurzel S.E. and Hsu S.C. 2022 _Phys. Plasmas_ **29** 062103

[29] Cheng B. _et al_ 2021 _Nucl. Fusion_ **61** 096010

[30] Abu-Shawareb H. _et al_ 2022 _Phys. Rev. Lett._ **129** 075001

[31] Cheng B. _et al_ 2013 _Phys. Rev. E_ **88** 041101(R)

[32] Cheng B. _et al_ 2014 _Phys. Plasmas_ **21** 102707

[33] Wang Z. 2015 _J. Instrum._ **10** C12013

[34] Lin S. _et al_ 2023 _arXiv_ :2311.05726; `[https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.05726](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.05726)`

[35] Wang Z. _et al_ 2023 _IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science_ **70** 1244 - 1280

[36] Hu C. _et al_ 2019 _Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A_ **940** 223-229

[37] Hu C. _et al_ 2022 _arXiv_ :2203.06731; `[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.06731](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.06731 )`

[38] Wang Z. _et al_ 2021 _OSA Technical Digest_ (Optica Publishing Group, 2021), paper DF4F.4;


_CONTENTS_ 25

```
   https://doi.org/10.1364/DH.2021.DF4F.4
```

[39] Wolfe B.T. _et al_ 2021 _Rev. Sci. Instrum._ **92** 033547

[40] Park T. _et al_ 2020 _arXiv_ :2007.15651

[41] Cunningham G.S. _et a_ 1995 _An Interactive Tool for Bayesian Inference_ . In: _Review of Progress_
_in Quantitative Nondestructive Evaluation_ Vol. **14** . Ed. by Donald O. Thompson and Dale E.
Chimenti. Boston, MA: Springer US, pp. 747–754

[42] Spannagel S. _et al_ 2018 _Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A_ **901** 164-172

[43] Fischer R. _et al_ 2003 _Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion_ **45** 1095 - 1111

[44] Sjue S.K. _et al_ 2020 Los Alamos National Laboratory Report LA-UR-20-26337

[45] Lin S. _et al_ 2023 _Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A_ **1057** 168769

[46] Wang Z. _et al_ 2021 _Rev. Sci. Instr._ **92** 043708


